# The Gods Within

## An analysis of Erich Neumann's "The Origins and History of Consciousness"

### How I got to this point and what am I doing here?

* In recent years I've become more and more fascinated with myth, Jungian
  psychology and their intersection.

* While researching these themes about 18 months ago I came across Jordan
  Peterson's video on YouTube on [Carl Jung and the Lion
King](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3iLiKMUiyTI).  I was really wowed by his
analysis of the movie and his ability to tie the themes of the movie to its
underlying mythological and psychological themes. 

* To give you an idea in looking at the first scene of the movie, a sunrise, he
  ties the first seconds of the film to the rise of consciousness, connects the
Lion's mane to the sun and solar gods/kings, the hero's journey to  illuminating
higher consciousness, and rebirth.

* I want to be able to understand and explain this symbolism myself and get to
  the bottom of if if I can. What's at the root of this? Is that question
something we can even answer?

* That led me to starting many books by Jung, Marie Louis Von Franz and Erich
  Neumann, but I have struggled with the themes but the more I dive in; the more
rewarding it becomes.  I'd like to share what I've learned with you.

Eventually I landed on Neumann - a student and then colleague of Jung. His "The
Origins and History of Consciousness" is such a fascinating book on so many
levels. Jungian's like Neumann have an understanding of human history and in
particular Western history and its influence on the individual that is more
comprehensive than anything I have seen. They can cut through thousands of
years of history and find the themes that still heavily influence us today.  I
am also fascinated with Jung's incorporation of myth into his work on the
psyche and the collective unconscious. I became even more interested in reading
this book when seeing Jung's forward where Jung states "if I were granted a
second lease on life I would start to ... sift out all those 'beginnings
without continuation' and knead them into a whole. This difficult and
meritorious task the author has performed with outstanding success."  It seems
even Jung is suggesting this is the book to read. Who am I to differ? 

As intriguing as I have found this book it is a difficult read.  I am not a
Jungian Analyst so I am learning as I go.  I have started the book over five
times. Although re-reading has helped me understand a good deal more of the
concepts Neumann puts forth, but sometimes each page can be challenging. I have
recently broken up the sidewalk on the east side of my house and reading each
page of the book at times feels analogous to hauling off a large chunk of
concrete.  I found myself wishing for a discussion of the book. Many popular
books like the Harry Potter and Game of Thrones series have podcasts where
podcasters go through a book chapter by chapter and offer analysis. I haven't
found such a resource online as of it yet.  So the next best thing is to do this
myself.  This is an ambitious intellectual task and I will probably lack the
expertise to do job a good Jungian Analyst would do but the process will be
enlightening for me as I hope it is for you..


* Back to Peterson's interpretation of the Lion King.  I think he is
  interpreting the symbolism correctly or at least a correct interpretation. 

* The strange thing about symbolism is we understand them at some level but they
  are very hard to explain verbally rationally.  Symbols stirs us but they are
so hard to our finger on.   Symbols often point to things we have consciously
forgotten but are still there at an unconscious level so they affect us, stir us
and move us. Jung said a symbol is "something more and other than itself which
eludes our present knowledge." He also called it "the best possible formulation
of a relatively unknown thing, which for that reason cannot be clearly or
characteristically represented."  

* Symbols art typically rich with visual information that can be interpreted in
  many often contradictory ways. 

* The etymology of the word symbol is a good example of this. 

* Jungian analyst Anthony Stevens in his book *Ariadne's Clue* explains
  symbolism as follows. It comes from the Greek word *symbolon* coming from
*sym* which means together, and *ballein* which means to throw. Throw together.
Often an object like a bone would be broken in two with each half being given to
member's of a secret society. The two pieces could be united to create a match
and establish identity. (This is how public key cryptography works at a high
level in computing interestingly enough).  

* That is a great microcosm of Jung's model of the psyche. The collective
  unconscious sends messages via symbols to the conscious ego in an effort to
compensate for something that is lacking. If the ego can understand and
assimilate the message, the individual achieves higher consciousness and growth.
Consciousness develops out of the unconscious. Jung called this process
individuation. Neumann in this book outlines what he sees as the stages of
individuation based on mythological projections from the collective unconscious.

Some definitions are in order here to help us get started. If you are familiar
with Jung and his work this will be old hat for you. These concepts are covered
in volumes of books but I will try to give you just enough here to get started. 

* Archetype on the first page of the introduction Neumann gives us a nice
  straight forward definition. "They (archetypes) are the pictorial forms of
instincts, for the unconscious mind in images which as in dreams and fantasies,
initiate the process of conscious reaction and assimilation. ".  Lets repeat
this again: "They (archetypes) are the pictorial forms of
instincts, for the unconscious mind in images which as in dreams and fantasies,
initiate the process of conscious reaction and assimilation. "

* Collective unconscious definition: A trans-personal or collective part of the
  psyche that has grown out of evolutionary experience that speaks to the ego
in symbols or archetypes. We aren't blank slates but a "pre-programmed" with
archetypal reactions to life situations we encounter, like falling in love,
becoming a parent for example. Think of this as the psychological side of human
evolution.

* Individuation a process of individual increase in consciousness ( perhaps
  analogous to emotional, spiritual and intellectual maturity) by surfacing archetypal
images,  wrestling with their significance, and making them conscious. 

* Complex: a series of archetypal images around a common theme (mother, father,
  money and many many others). When we are complexed about say our mother (or
anything symbolically representative of a mother) we become possessed by the
mother archetype. In other words ideas can have you. We are not blank slates.
More on this to come.

### Recommended reading or listening if you want more depth on Jung and his model of the psyche.
[The Jung Podcast](https://jungian.libsyn.com/) and excellent introduction to
Jung's model of the psyche by a practitioner. 

[On Jung by Anthony Stevens](https://www.amazon.com/gp/offer-listing/069101048X).


## Introduction

What is Neumann trying to accomplish in this book? We don't have to read far to
answer this question. In the first sentence of the introduction he states: "The
following attempt outline the archetypal stages of the development of
consciousness is based on modern depth psychology. It is an application of the
analytical psychology of C.J. Jung ..."

The key word here is phases.  His theory outlines what he sees as the stages
of the development of consciousness.

Neumann:  "It is the task of this book to show that a series of archetypes is a
main constituent of mythology, that they (archetypes) stand in stadial
succession in an organic relation to one another, and that their stadial
succession determines the growth of consciousness. In the course of its
ontogenetic (lifetime) development, the individual ego has to pass through the
same archetypal stages which determined the evolution of consciousness in the
life humanity. 

What I think he is saying in this statement is that historically human
consciousness went through a series of stages of development. The individual in
his lifetime passes through these same stages as the species. These stages are
composed of archetypes - pictoral forms of instincts. We see these archetypes in
mythology.  Think of it this way: from an evolutionary standpoint it took
millions of years to make you. The archetypes, the collective unconscious and
myth are a storehouse of information that we can tap into or can tap into us. We
aren't blank slates in the Jungian world. We can have ideas but ideas can also
have us (Peterson). Another way of saying this is the collective unconscious
influences us much more than we are ever aware of. Species level development or
the collective unconscious influences us as individuals greatly.

Passing through each stage, the ego transforms its relationship to the
archetypes. "The ability to perceive, to understand, and to interpret these
images is a process of succession in time, ..  it takes place in stages." This
ability to absorb unconscious contents improves at each stage and leads to
individual transformation and improvement. Jung called this telos which means
self-realization. 

We can get a feel for these stages composed of archetypes by just examining the
section titles of the book. We will do a podcast episode about each of these.

A. The Creation Myth
	I. The Uroborous
	II. The Great Mother
	III. The Seperation of of World Parents: The Principle of Opposites

B. The Hero Myth
	I. The Birth of the Hero
	II. The Slaying of the Mother
	III. The Slaying of the Father

C. The Transformation Myth 
	I. The Captive and the Treasure
	II. Transformation or Osiris


Human consciousness has absorbed more and more unconscious contents over
thousands of years and in this process expands its own frontiers. Neumann
suggests that in the West consciousness has achieved continuity where each stage
is integrated. According to Neumann modern consciousness sits on this
integration.

Now when he says West this includes ancient Babylon and Egypt. I am really
excited to get into this aspect of the book because its absolutely fascinating.
He ties the myths like those of Marduk (Babylon), Osiris (Egypt), and Christ
together as themes that are the  basis for development of society and
consciousness.  This is that ability to look under the current of history and
see the themes that still influence us today that make Neumann so compelling and
fascinating.

Why is this podcast called The Gods Within? For Neumann that which was projected
outward the gods is still with us in our psyches due to the influence of the
collective unconscious.  The collective unconscious is the deeper layer of
humanity that each of us is connected to.  Consciousness is a late evolutionary
product and the collective unconscious came first. Throughout human history and
pre-history symbols were projected outward as powerful forces or gods. These
same symbols and archetypes determine individual psychic growth as well.

Neumann states "The integration of these collective symbols leads to the further
development of the psyche and synthesis of the personality  thus it has a
therapeutic aim as well. In this process the psyche expands leading to new
solutions and new problems which trigger the whole process again. The collective
human aspect is rediscovered and begins to come alive, new insights, new
possibilities of life add themselves to the narrowly personalistic and rigid
personality of the sick-souled modern man." 
 
## Podcast conclusion I am passionate about learning about this fascinating
intersection of myth and psychology and I hope you will join me on this journey.
Subscribe.
